MIN 2D Graphics Engine
Draft 1
Sun Aug 15 14:46:24 EDT 2004
Bob Walton
walton@acm.org

This document is a draft specification of the Minimal Descriptive Programming
Language (MIN) 2D graphics engine.

INTRODUCTION

The 2D engine draws a `virtual world' which is 3D with limits.  This world
contains:

	ground		A set of points (gx, gy, gz) where gravity is always
			in the negative gz direction, so gz is height.

			The ground is an abstraction computable from view
			information.

	view		A view is a 2D image of the ground and other things.
			More specifically, a view is a rectangle of pixels
			which may be much bigger than what can be displayed
			at one time.  For each pixel the following is given:

			    (x,y): View coordinates of the pixel.

			    z: Distance coordinate from camera of pixel.

			    vgz: Distance coordinate from camera of ground
			    point that would be seen by camera if there were
			    no obstruction.  If vgz = z, then there is in fact
			    no obstruction and the camera is looking at the
			    ground for this pixel.  Otherwise z < vgz is
			    required.

			    ARGB: Color value for what is visible; here A is
			    an alpha value that says the visible color equals
			    A * foreground color + ( 1 - A ) ground color.

			    forbidden flag: Set if a ground object (see below)
			    is not permitted to be at the ground point that
			    would be visible at this pixel position were there
			    no obstruction.

			    segment list: List of segments (see below) that
			    are near to this pixel, and for each listed
			    segment the distance from this pixel to that
			    segment.

			Note that the (gx,gy,gz) coordinates of the ground
			point that would be visible were there no obstruction
			can be computed from (and are a linear or projective
			linear function of) the (x,y,vgz) coordinates for the
			pixel.

	ground object	This is an object that has a contact point on the
			ground and moves its contact point along the ground.
			More specifically, a ground object has:

			    view: The view the object is in.

			    contact point (x,y): The view coordinates of
			    a pixel of the view.

			    ground contact point (gx,gy,gz): Computable
			    from the view contact point (x,y,vgz); the ground
			    contact point corresponding to the view contact
			    point.

			    rotation angle R: The direction in the (gx,gy)
			    plane that the object is facing.  R = 0 if the
			    object is facing the positive gx direction.

			    height H: The object can jump above its contact
			    point by some height H that adds to gz.

			    configuration graph C: This is a directed graph
			    of configurations, where a configuration is
			    intuitively a position of the ground object when
			    it is facing in the positive gx direction.  As a
			    directed graph, this has nodes that are configur-
			    ations, and arrows that are transitions from one
			    configuration to another.  A loop of 20 configur-
			    ations could be use, for example, to represent a
			    20 frame walking loop or a 20 frame crawling loop.

			        Each configuration has:

				    stop flag: Set if the object can stop in
				    this configuration.  If not set, there
				    must be exactly one arrow leaving this
				    configuration, and the renderer will follow
				    this arrow to prevent the object from
				    stopping in this configuration.

				    for each of 16 rotations (16 R values):

				        graphic surface: A rectangular array
					of pixels each with an ARGB value,
					where A is an alpha value used
					for blending by the formula

					  color = A * (configuration color )
					        + (1 - A) * (background color )

				        where color is one of R, G, or B.  The
					graph surface used is the one whose
					rotation is closest to R.


				each arrow has:

				    (dgx,dgy,dgz): Change in contact point when
				    arrow is followed.  Intuitively this
				    means that changing to another configura-
				    tion moves the contact point.  However,
				    the renderer will only use this as an
				    approximation.

	foreground object   This is an object that is drawn on top of a view
			    and modifies the view.  E.g., an open door as
			    opposed to a closed door.  It has:
			    
			    view: The view this can modify.

			    pixel information: Same as for the view, but for a
			    small number of pixels of the view.  This
			    information overlays the view pixel information
			    when the foreground object is active.

			    active flag: Set when object is active and its
			    pixels overlay those of the view.

			    Foreground objects that are simultaneously active
			    must not overlap.

	carried object	    A carried object is an object that can be carried
			    by a ground object.  Each carried object has

			    a ground object: This is the only object that can
			    carry the carried object.

			    for some ground object configurations, and for
			    each of 16 rotation of those configurations:

			        a small graphic surface: This replaces part of
				the graphic surface of the ground object for
				the given configuration and rotation.

			    a priority P: If a ground object is carrying two
			    carried objects, the objects with lower priority
			    replace graphic surface pixels first.

			    active flag: Set when object is active and is
			    being carried, so its graphic surfaces replace
			    part of the carrying ground object's graphic
			    surfaces.

			    Two objects with the same priority should not
			    overlap and be active at the same time.

	segment		    A segment just has an identifier naming the
			    segment.  When the contact point of a ground
			    object moves to a pixel, the segment list of
			    the pixel can be used to trigger actions.
		
			    For example, a curved line can be used as a
			    segment that represents a wall that cannot be
			    moved through, a door that might open
			    automatically when approached, or an invisible
			    boundary between regions with different game
			    properties.


Notes:

When blending a ground object, the actual formula is

    object z = vgz at object contact point (x,y)

    if ( object z <= pixel z )	# object obscures view

        alpha = object alpha

    else # view obscures object

	alpha = (object alpha) * (1 - view alpha)

    color = alpha * (object color) + (1 - alpha) * (view color)

Thus if view obscures object and view alpha = 1.0 the object is not
seen, and if object obscures view and object alpha = 1.0 the view is
not seen.

It remains to be seen how big ground objects can be for this to run fast
enough.  It may be possible to represent movement of a single large object
by having many views, i.e. backgrounds, and cycling through them.

The height of the object is used to offset both object z and the object
graphic surface being used by (0,0,H) in ground coordinates translated
into the corresponding displacement in (x,y,z) view coordinates.

When the camera angle changes, everything changes, including the view and the
ground object configuration graphic surfaces.  Thus only a very few camera
angles can be supported.

In theory any graphics surface can be scaled to any smaller size in a manner
that looks good if the pixels are small enough to begin with.  Thus the
information above is sufficient to scale ground and carried object graphic
surfaces to indicate projective size decrease.  It remains to be seen if
this looks good or can be done fast enough.
